.TH FAPOLICYD.TRUST: "5" "January 2020" "Red Hat" "System Administration Utilities"
.SH NAME
fapolicyd.trust \- fapolicyd's file of trust
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file
.I /etc/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.trust
contains list of trusted files/binaries for the application whitelisting daemon. You may add comments to the file by starting the line with a '#' character.
Each non-comment line contains a full path, size in bytes, and a valid SHA256
hash. Version 3 trust files write paths without escaping and find the size and
hash by splitting at the final two spaces. A path may therefore contain spaces.
The \fBfapolicyd-cli --file\fP commands receive ordinary shell arguments; quote
a path containing a space in the shell, for example
\fBfapolicyd-cli --file add "/tmp/first last/"\fP. In a version 3 trust file,
\fB%20\fP is a literal percent sign followed by \fB20\fP, not a space.
.sp
The size field is an unsigned 64-bit byte count written in decimal. This
fixed representation is intentionally independent of the native C
\fBoff_t\fP and \fBsize_t\fP types, so trust records retain the same syntax
on 32-bit and 64-bit builds. A record whose size cannot be represented by the
native file-size type used for a filesystem comparison is rejected.
.sp
Version 2 trust files are accepted for compatibility and use their legacy
percent escaping, including \fB%20\fP for a space. Newly rewritten trust files
use version 3, so do not use version-2 percent escapes in new entries.
.sp
The directory \fI/etc/fapolicyd/trust\&.d\fR can be used to store multiple trust files\&.
This way a privileged user can split the trust database into multiple files and manage them separately through \fBfapolicyd\-cli\fR\&.
Functionally, the fapolicy daemon will behave the same way as if the whole trust database has been defined inside \fBfapolicyd\&.trust\fR file\&.
Syntax and semantics of trust files inside \fBtrust\&.d\fR directory are the same as for \fBfapolicyd\&.trust\fR file (described above)\&.
Trust files can either be created manually inside \fBtrust\&.d\fR directory or via \fBfapolicyd\-cli\fR\& (the latter option is recommended).

.SH EXAMPLE
.PP
.EX
[root@Desktop ~]# cat /etc/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.trust
/home/user/my-ls 157984 61a9960bf7d255a85811f4afcac51067b8f2e4c75e21cf4f2af95319d4ed1b87
/home/user/my-ls2 5555 61a9960bf7d255a85811f4afcac51067b8f2e4c75e21cf4f2af95319d4ed1b87
.EE

.SH FILES
.B /etc/fapolicyd/fapolicyd.trust
- list of trusted files/binaries

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR fapolicyd (8),
.BR fapolicyd-cli (8)
.BR fapolicy.rules (5)
and
.BR fapolicy.conf (5).

.SH AUTHOR
Radovan Sroka
